Resuscitation Council UK
Adult Basic Life Support Guidelines

Source: European Resuscitation Council Guidelines 2025 Adult Basic Life Support.
Resuscitation 2025;215 (Suppl 1):110771. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resuscitation.2025.110771
Published 27 October 2025.

Key points

Everyone can learn how to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
Train ambulance service call handlers in cardiac arrest recognition and telephone-CPR.
Recognition of cardiac arrest can be challenging.
If a person is found unresponsive, call 999 as soon as possible. Ideally this should be
carried out by a bystander, but if no one else is available you should make the call
yourself before assessing whether breathing is normal. The ambulance service call
handler will be able to assist you if you are uncertain.
If a person is unresponsive with abnormal breathing, assume they are in cardiac arrest.
Start chest compressions as soon as possible.
Compress the chest at a rate of 100-120 min-1.
Compress to a depth of at least 5 cm, but not more than 6 cm.
If providing rescue breaths, deliver just enough air to make the chest start to rise;
avoid excessive ventilation.
If you are unable to ventilate the chest, consider a foreign body airway obstruction.
Anyone can use an Automated External Defibrillator (AED).
AEDs should be widely available, prominently sign-posted, housed in unlocked cabinets,
and accessible 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Signage should state no training is needed.
The risk of harm from CPR is low. Rescuers should not be concerned that they will cause
serious injury if the person is not in cardiac arrest.

Changes from the 2021 guidelines

Call 999 for any unresponsive person. Rescuers no longer need to confirm abnormal
breathing before calling. Initiate the call first, then assess breathing while waiting
for the call to be answered. The ambulance service call handler will help identify
abnormal breathing if needed.
Exercise is a common precipitant of cardiac arrest. The 2021 guidelines emphasised
slow or laboured breathing as indicators of abnormal breathing. For 2025, it is
recognised that early after the onset of cardiac arrest, athletes may display a
near-normal or panting breathing pattern.
Added: details of the role of the ambulance service call handler in early recognition
of cardiac arrest and initiation of CPR.
Added: recognition that finding a person in cardiac arrest and attempting resuscitation
can be a traumatic experience for lay rescuers; the 2025 guideline recognises lay
rescuers and bystanders may benefit from support.

Introduction

Guidelines 2025 continues to prioritise supporting members of communities to have the
confidence, knowledge and skills to act when someone sustains an out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest. The principles of CPR remain the same, with increased emphasis on the difficulty
of recognising cardiac arrest and the role ambulance service call handlers play.

It is more important that people feel able to do something to help than become focused
on small details or concerned about causing harm. No greater harm can occur than failing
to act when someone requires CPR and defibrillation.

Bystander CPR and use of an AED increase the chances of survival by two to four-fold.

These guidelines are intended to support members of the public (including those
activated by a smartphone app), children and family members, first responders, and
those with a duty to respond (e.g. lifeguards, first aiders). When a cardiac arrest
occurs, systems and education should ensure that: cardiac arrest is recognised early;
help is sought (shout for nearby help and call 999); CPR is promptly started; an AED
is located, retrieved and used as early as possible.

Guidelines: the 3 steps to save a life

1. Check
   - Is it safe to approach?
   - Is the person conscious?
2. Call 999 immediately if they are unresponsive.
   - Assess breathing.
   - If unsure, the ambulance service call handler will assist you.
3. CPR: Start CPR immediately if they are unresponsive with abnormal breathing.
   - As soon as an AED is available, attach it and follow the AED instructions.
   - If unsure, the ambulance service call handler will assist you.

Recognising cardiac arrest

Suspect cardiac arrest in any person who is unresponsive.
Call 999 without delay.
Assess their breathing while you wait for the call to be answered.
Slow, laboured breathing, as well as other abnormal patterns such as agonal gasping or
panting, must be recognised as signs of cardiac arrest.
A short period of seizure-like activity may occur at the onset of cardiac arrest. Once
the seizure stops, assess breathing.
If any person is unresponsive with abnormal breathing, cardiac arrest should be assumed.
If there is any doubt, assume cardiac arrest and start CPR.

Alerting the ambulance service

If you have a mobile phone, activate the speaker function and call 999 without delay.
Assess breathing while you wait for the call to be answered.
If you are alone and do not have a mobile phone, or there is no network/satellite
connection, shout for help and then continue to assess breathing.
If you think no one will come to help, leave the person and call 999 as quickly as
possible.
If they remain unresponsive and are not breathing normally when you return from
summoning help, immediately start CPR.

Role of ambulance service 999 call handlers

Emergency ambulance service call handlers should use standardised protocols to
facilitate recognition of cardiac arrest.
Once cardiac arrest is recognised, call handlers should provide CPR instructions to
all callers, assuming the caller does not know how to perform CPR, and giving
chest-compression-only instructions unless the caller states they know how to perform
rescue breaths (then facilitate 30:2 CPR).
Once CPR is underway, the call handler should ask if there is an AED at the scene, and
guide bystanders to the nearest AED if not, or instruct activation and use once available.

High-quality chest compressions

Start chest compressions as soon as possible.
Place the heel of one hand on the lower half of the sternum ("in the centre of the
chest"). If clothing prevents visualising the sternum, it is reasonable to displace
or remove garments to identify the correct anatomic landmark.
Place the heel of the other hand on top of the first hand; interlock fingers so
pressure is not applied over the ribs.
Keep arms straight; position shoulders vertically above the person's chest.
Compress to a depth of at least 5 cm, but not more than 6 cm.
Compress the chest at a rate of 100-120 min-1 with as few interruptions as possible.
Allow the chest to recoil completely after each compression; avoid leaning on the chest.
CPR is most effective on a firm surface, but rescuers should not move a person from a
soft surface (e.g. a bed) to the floor — start CPR on the bed and compress deeper if
needed to compensate for the soft mattress.

Rescue breaths

If trained to provide rescue breaths, alternate 30 chest compressions with 2 rescue
breaths.
Deliver just enough air to make the chest start to rise; avoid excessive ventilation.
If unable to ventilate the chest after two attempts, consider foreign body airway
obstruction.
If not trained to provide rescue breaths, perform continuous chest compressions
without interruptions.

Using an Automated External Defibrillator (AED)

Anyone can use an AED.

How to find an AED: AED locations should be indicated by clear signage stating that
AEDs can be used by anyone and that no training is needed. Locations may also be
identified using electronic mapping systems on mobile phones/computer applications.
In the UK, the ambulance service can direct callers to the nearest AED via The Circuit,
a national database of public-access AED location and availability.

When and how to use an AED:
- Use an AED as soon as it is available.
- Open the AED case; some AEDs turn on automatically, otherwise identify the power
  button and turn it on.
- Follow the audio/visual prompts from the AED.
- Attach the electrode pads to the person's bare chest according to the position shown
  on the AED/pads.
- Removing a bra before defibrillation: prioritise correct pad placement and contact
  with bare skin. If achievable quickly without removing the bra, it is acceptable to
  keep it in place; if the bra interferes with pad position, remove it. Rescuers should
  not be concerned about exposing the person's chest and should prioritise life-saving
  intervention.
- If more than one rescuer is present, continue CPR while the pads are being attached.
- Ensure nobody touches the person while the AED is analysing the heart rhythm, and
  ensure nobody is touching the person if a shock is indicated.
- Fully automatic AEDs deliver a shock automatically; semi-automatic AEDs require the
  rescuer to press the shock button.
- After a shock is delivered, or if no shock is indicated, immediately restart chest
  compressions and continue to follow the AED instructions (it will typically prompt
  CPR, then pause for rhythm analysis at set intervals).

Where to place AEDs

AEDs should be placed in clear sight, in unlocked cabinets, readily accessible 24/7/365.
Locations with high population flow (airports, shopping centres, railway stations)
should have on-site, readily accessible AEDs.
Communities are encouraged to deploy AEDs in public spaces, particularly those with
higher incidence of cardiac arrest.
AEDs should be registered with The Circuit so their location/availability is available
to the ambulance service during a 999 call.

Safety

Ensure the safety of yourself, the person in cardiac arrest, and any bystanders.
Lay people should start CPR for presumed cardiac arrest without concern about harm to
people not in cardiac arrest.
The risk of infection to rescuers performing CPR is low.
The risk of harm to rescuers from accidental shock during AED use is low.
The risk of physical injury to the rescuer from performing CPR is low.
Consider the wellbeing of laypeople and bystanders; offer them support. Resuscitation
Council UK has a dedicated support page for anyone affected by cardiac arrest.

Related algorithms (not included in this file — separate RCUK pages):
Adult community BLS algorithm 2025; Adult in-hospital algorithm 2025;
Adult choking algorithm 2025.
